NON-TRADITIONAL MACHINING 
(Professional Elective-I) 
[AS PER CHOICE BASED CREDIT SYSTEM (CBCS) SCHEME] 
SEMESTER  VI 
 
Subject Code 18ME641  
Teaching Hours / Week IA Marks 20 
Lecture Tutorial Practical Exam Marks 80 
03 00 00 Exam Hours 03 
CREDITS   03 
 
Course Outcomes 
On completion of the course, the students will be able to 
1. Understand the compare traditional and non-traditional machining process and recognize 
the need for Non-traditional machining process. 
2. Understand the constructional features, performance parameters, process characteristics, 
applications, advantages and limitations of USM, AJM and WJM. 
3. Identify the need of Chemical and electro-chemical machining process along with the 
constructional features, process parameters, process characteristics, applications, advantages 
and limitations. 
4. Understand the constructional feature of the equipment, process parameters, process 
characteristics, applications, advantages and limitations EDM & PAM. 
5. Understand the LBM equipment, LBM parameters, and characteristics. EBM equipment 
and mechanism of metal removal, applications, advantages and limitations LBM & EBM. 
 
MODULE 1 
INTRODUCTION 
Introduction to Non-traditional machining, Need for Non-traditional machining process, 
Comparison between traditional and non-traditional machining, general classification Non- 
traditional machining processes, classification based on nature of energy employed in 
machining, selection of non-traditional machining processes, Specific advantages, limitations 
and applications of non-traditional machining processes. 08 hours 
 
MODULE 2 
Ultrasonic Machining (USM): Introduction, Equipment and material process, Effect of 
process parameters: Effect of amplitude and frequency, Effect of abrasive grain diameter, 
effect of slurry, tool & work material. Process characteristics: Material removal rate, tool 
wear, accuracy, surface finish, applications, advantages & limitations of USM. 
Abrasive Jet Machining (AJM): Introduction, Equipment and process of material removal, 
process variables: carrier gas, type of abrasive, work material, stand-off distance 
(SOD).Process characteristics-Material removal rate, Nozzle wear, accuracy & surface finish. 
Applications, advantages & limitations of AJM. 
Water Jet Machining (WJM): Equipment & process, Operation, applications, advantages 
and limitations of WJM. 08 hours 
MODULE 3 
ELECTROCHEMICAL MACHINING (ECM) 
Introduction, Principle of electro chemical machining: ECM equipment, elements of ECM 
operation, Chemistry of ECM. ECM Process characteristics: Material removal rate, accuracy, 
surface finish. 
Process parameters: Current density, Tool feed rate, Gap between tool & work piece, velocity 
of electrolyte flow, type of electrolyte, its concentration temperature, and choice of 
electrolytes. ECM Tooling: ECM tooling technique & example, Tool & insulation materials. 
Applications ECM: Electrochemical grinding and electrochemical honing process. 
Advantages, disadvantages and application of ECG, ECH. 
CHEMICAL MACHINING (CHM) 
Elements of the process: Resists (maskants), Etchants. Types of chemical machining process- 
chemical blanking process, chemical milling process. 
Process characteristics of CHM: material removal rate, accuracy, surface finish, advantages, 
limitations and applications of chemical machining process. 10 hours 
 
MODULE 4 
 
ELECTRICAL DISCHARGE MACHINING (EDM) 
Introduction, mechanism of metal removal, EDM equipment: spark erosion generator 
(relaxation type), dielectric medium-its functions & desirable properties, electrode feed 
control system. Flushing types; pressure flushing, suction flushing, side flushing, pulsed 
flushing. EDM process parameters: Spark frequency, current & spark gap, surface finish, 
Heat Affected Zone. Advantages, limitations & applications of EDM, Electrical discharge 
grinding, Traveling wire EDM. 
PLASMA ARC MACHINING (PAM) 
Introduction, non-thermal generation of plasma, equipment mechanism of metal removal, 
Plasma torch, process parameters, process characteristics. Safety precautions. Safety 
precautions, applications, advantages and limitations. 08 hours 
 
MODULE 5 
 
LASER BEAM MACHINING (LBM) 
Introduction, generation of LASER, Equipment and mechanism of metal removal, LBM 
parameters and characteristics, Applications, Advantages & limitations. 
ELECTRON BEAM MACHINING (EBM) 
Introduction, Principle, equipment and mechanism of metal removal, applications, 
Advantages & limitations. 08 hours 
Text Books: 
1. Modern Machining Process by P.C Pandey and H S Shah, McGraw Hill Education India 
Pvt. Ltd. 2000 
2. Production technology, HMT, McGraw Hill Education India Pvt. Ltd. 2001 
 
Reference Books 
1. New Technology, Dr. Amitabha Bhattacharyya, The Institute of Engineers (India), 2000 
2. Modern Machining process, Aditya, 2002. 
  Non-Traditional Machining  
 
NON-TRADITIONAL MACHINING 
Module -1 
 
INTRODUCTION 
LESSON STRUCTURE: 
1.1 Definition 
 
1.2 Non traditional machining (ntm) processes characteristics 
 
1.3 Need for development of non-conventional processes 
 
1.4 Differences between conventional and non conventional machining processes 
 
1.5 Selection of process 
 
1.6 Physical parameter of the process 
 
 
OBJECTIVES 
 ii. Identify the characteristics of non traditional machining 
 iii. Differentiate between conventional and non traditional machining 
 iv. Classify different non traditional machining processes 
 v. Identify the need for non traditional machining processes 
Non-Traditional  Machining   
  
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Non-traditional manufacturing processes is defined as a group of processes 
that remove excess material by various techniques involving mechanical, thermal, 
electrical or chemical energy or combinations of these energies but do not use a sharp 
cutting tools as it needs to be used for traditional manufacturing processes. 
 
Extremely hard and brittle materials are difficult to machine by traditional 
machining processes such as turning, drilling, shaping and milling. Non-traditional 
machining processes, also called advanced manufacturing processes, are employed 
where traditional machining processes are not feasible, satisfactory or economical due to 
special reasons as outlined below. 
 Very hard fragile materials difficult to clamp for traditional machining 
 When the workpiece is too flexible or slender 
 When the shape of the part is too complex 
 
Several types of non-traditional machining processes have been developed to meet extra 
required machining conditions. When these processes are employed properly, they offer 
many advantages over non-traditional machining processes. The common non- 
traditional machining processes are described in this section. 
1.1 Definition: 
A machining process is called non-traditional if its material removal 
mechanism is basically different than those in the traditional processes, i.e. a different 
form of energy (other than the excessive forces exercised by a tool, which is in physical 
contact with the work piece) is applied to remove the excess material from the work 
surface, or to separate the workpiece into smaller parts. 
Non-Traditional  Machining   
 
1.2 Non Traditional Machining (NTM) Processes are characterised as 
follows: 
 Material removal may occur with chip formation or even no chip formation may take 
place. 
For example in AJM, chips are of microscopic size and in case of Electrochemical 
machining material removal occurs due to electrochemical dissolution at atomic level 
 In NTM, there may not be a physical tool present. For example in laser jet machining, 
machining is carried out by laser beam. However in Electrochemical Machining there is 
a physical tool that is very much required for machining 
 In NTM, the tool need not be harder than the work piece material. For example, 
inEDM, copper is used as the tool material to machine hardened steels. 
 Mostly NTM processes do not necessarily use mechanical energy to provide material 
removal. They use different energy domains to provide machining. For example, in 
USM, AJM, WJM mechanical energy is used to machine material, 
 
1.3 Need for development of Non-Conventional Processes 
The strength of steel alloys has increased five folds due to continuous R and D 
effort. In aero-space requirement of High strength at elevated temperature with light 
weight led to development and use of hard titanium alloys, nimonic alloys, and other 
HSTR alloys. The ultimate tensile strength has been improved by as much as 20 times. 
Development of cutting tools which has hardness of 80 to 85 HRC which cannot be 
machined economically in 
conventional methods led to development of non traditional machining methods. 
1. Technologically advanced industries like aerospace, nuclear power, ,wafer 
fabrication, automobiles has ever increasing use of High strength temperature resistant 
(HSTR) alloys (having high strength to weight ratio) and other difficult to machine 
materials like titanium, SST,nimonics, ceramics and semiconductors. It is no longer 
possible to use conventional process to machine these alloys. 
2. Production and processing parts of complicated shapes (in HSTR and other 
hard to machine alloys) is difficult , time consuming an uneconomical by conventional 
methods of machining 
Non-Traditional  Machining   
 
3. Innovative geometric design of products and components made of new exotic 
materials with desired tolerance, surface finish cannot be produced economically by 
conventional machining. 
4. The following examples are provided where NTM processes are preferred over 
the conventional machining process: 
 Intricate shaped blind hole  e.g. square hole of 15 mmx15 mm with a depth of 30 mm 
with a tolerance of 100 microns 
 Difficult to machine material  e.g. Inconel, Ti-alloys or carbides, Ceramics, 
composites , HSTR alloys, satellites etc., 
 Low Stress Grinding  Electrochemical Grinding is preferred as compared to 
conventional grinding 
 Deep hole with small hole diameter   1.5 mm hole with l/d = 20 
 Machining of composites  
 
1.4 Differences between Conventional and Non-conventional machining 
Processes . 
 
 
Sl Conventional Process Non-Conventional Process 
No. 
1. The cutting tool and work piece  are There is no physical contact between 
always in physical contact with the tool and work piece, In some non 
relative motion with each other, traditional process tool wear exists. 
which results in friction and tool  
wear.  
2. Material removal rate is limited by NTM can machine difficult to cut and 
mechanical properties of work hard to cut materials like 
material. titanium,ceramics,nimonics, 
 SST,composites,semiconducting 
 materials 
 
 
 
 
 
 Non-Traditional Machining    
 
 
3. Relative motion between  the tool Many NTM are capable of producing  
and work is typically rotary or complex 3D shapes and cavities 
reciprocating. Thus the shape of  
work is limited to circular or flat  
shapes. In spite of CNC systems,  
production of 3D surfaces is still a  
difficult task.  
4. Machining  of small cavities  , slits , Machining  of small cavities,  slits and 
blind holes or through holes are Production of non-circular, micro sized, 
difficult large aspect ratio, shall entry angle 
 holes are easy using NTM 
5. Use relative simple and  inexpensive  Non-traditional  processes  requires 
machinery and readily available expensive tools and equipment as well 
cutting tools as skilled labour, which increase the 
 production cost significantly 
6. Capital cost and maintenance  cost is Capital cost and maintenance  cost is 
low high 
7. Traditional  processes  are well Mechanics  of Material removal of Some 
established and physics of process of NTM process are still under research 
is well understood  
8. Conventional  process mostly uses Most NTM uses energy in direct form 
mechanical energy For example : laser, Electron beam in 
 its direct forms are used in LBM and 
 EBM respectively 
9. Surface finish and  tolerances  are High surface finish(up to 0.1 micron) 
limited by machining inaccuracies and tolerances (25 Microns)can be 
 achieved 
10. High metal removal  rate. Low material removal rate. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Non-Traditional Machining   
 
1.5 SELECTION OF PROCESS: 
The correct selection of the non-traditional machining methods must be based on the 
following aspects. 
i) Physical parameters of the process 
ii) Shape to be machined 
iii) Process capability 
iv) Economics of the processes  
 
Physical parameter of the process: 
The physical parameters of the different NTM are given in the Table 1.0 which indicates 
that PAM and ECM require high power for fast machining. EBM and LBM require high 
voltages and require careful handling of equipment. EDM and USM require medium 
power . EBM can be used in vacuum and PAM uses oxygen and hydrogen gas. 
 
Shapes cutting capability 
The different shapes can be machined by NTM. EBM and LBM are used for micro 
drilling and cutting. USM and EDM are useful for cavity sinking and standard hole 
drilling. ECM is useful for fine hole drilling and contour machining. PAM can be used 
for cutting and AJM is useful for shallow pocketing 
 
Process capability 
The process capability of NTM is given in Table 2.0 EDM which achieves higher 
accuracy has the lowest specific power requirement. ECM can machine faster and has a 
low thermal surface damage depth. USM and AJM have very material removal rates 
combined with high tool wear and are used non metal cutting. LBM and EBM are, due to 
their high penetration depth can be used for micro drilling, sheet cutting and welding. 
CHM is used for manufacture of PCM and other shallow components. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Non-Traditional Machining   
  
1.6 PHYSICAL PARAMETER OF THE PROCESS: 
 
 
Classification of NTM processes is carried out depending on the nature of energy 
used for material removal. The broad classification is given as follows: 
1) Mechanical Processes 
 
Abrasive Jet Machining (AJM) 
Ultrasonic Machining (USM) 
Water Jet Machining (WJM) 
2) Electrochemical Processes 
Electrochemical Machining (ECM) 
Electro Chemical Grinding (ECG) 
Electro Jet Drilling (EJD) 
3) Electro-Thermal Processes 
Electro-discharge machining (EDM) 
Laser Jet Machining (LJM) 
Electron Beam Machining (EBM) 
4) Chemical Processes 
Chemical Milling (CHM) 
Photochemical Milling (PCM) 
Non-Traditional Machining   
  
 
 
 
FURTHER READING: 
1. Modern machining process, Pandey and Shah, Tata McGraw Hill 2000 
2. New Technology, Bhattacharya 2000 
3. Production Technology, HMT Tata McGraw Hill. 2001 
 
Self-Assessment Questions 
1. What is necessity for unconventional machining processes? 
2. How non-traditional machining processes are classified? 
3. Enlist the requirement that demands the use of advanced machining process. 
4. Why unconventional mechanical machining process is not so effective on soft metals 
like aluminium? 
Non-Traditional  Machining   
Module -2
ULTRASONIC MACHINING (USM) 
LESSON STRUCTURE: 
2.1 Introduction 
2.2 USM working principle 
2.3 USM Machine 
2.4 Working of horn as mechanical amplifier of amplitude of 
vibration 
2.5 Process Variables 
2.6 Applications of USM 
2.7 Advantages of USM 
2.8 Disadvantages of USM 
 
OBJECTIVES: 
 Identify major components of USM equipment 
 State the working principle of USM equipment 
 Describe the basic mechanism of material removal in USM 
 Identify the process parameters of USM 
 Identify the machining characteristics of USM 
 Analyse the effect of process parameters on material removal rate (MRR) 
 Develop mathematical model relating MRR with USM parameters 
 Draw variation in MRR with different process parameters 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Non-Traditional  Machining   
 
 
ULTRASONIC MACHINING (USM) 
2.1 Introduction 
 
USM is mechanical material removal process or an abrasive process used to erode 
holes or cavities on hard or brittle workpiece by using shaped tools, high frequency 
mechanical motion and an abrasive slurry. USM offers a solution to the expanding need 
for machining brittle materials such as single crystals, glasses and polycrystalline 
ceramics, and increasing complex operations to provide intricate shapes and workpiece 
profiles. It is therefore used extensively in machining hard and brittle materials that are 
difficult to machine by traditional manufacturing processes. 
Ultrasonic Machining is a non-traditional process, in which abrasives contained in 
a slurry are driven against the work by a tool oscillating at low amplitude (25-100  
and high frequency (15-30 KHz): 
The process was first developed in 1950s and was originally used for finishing EDM 
surfaces. 
The basic process is that a ductile and tough tool is pushed against the work with 
a constant force. A constant stream of abrasive slurry passes between the tool and the 
work (gap is 25-  
cutting action comes from an ultrasonic (cyclic) force applied. 
 
The basic components to the cutting action are believed to be, 
 brittle fracture caused by impact of abrasive grains due to the tool vibration; 
 cavitation induced erosion ; 
 chemical erosion caused by slurry. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Non-Traditional  Machining   
 
2.2 USM working principle 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Material removal primarily occurs due to the indentation of the hard abrasive grits 
on the brittle work material. 
 
 Other than this brittle failure of the work material due to indentation some 
material removal may occur due to free flowing impact of the abrasives against 
the work material and related solid-solid impact erosion, 
 
  vibration  indentation by the abrasive grits. 
 
 During indentation, due to Hertzian contact stresses, cracks would develop just 
below the contact site, then as indentation progresses the cracks would propagate 
due to increase in stress and ultimately lead to brittle fracture of the work material 
 
 
 
Non-Traditional  Machining   
 
under each individual interaction site between the abrasive grits and the 
workpiece. 
 
 The tool material should be such that indentation by the abrasive grits does not 
lead to brittle failure. 
 
 Thus the tools are made of tough, strong and ductile materials like steel, stainless 
steel and other ductile metallic alloys. 
 
2.3 USM Machine 
 
 
 
 
 
USM Equipment 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Non-Traditional  Machining   
 
The basic mechanical structure of an USM is very similar to a drill press. 
However, it has additional features to carry out USM of brittle work material. The work 
piece is mounted on a vice, which can be located at the desired position under the tool 
using a 2 axis table. The table can further be lowered or raised to accommodate work of 
different thickness. 
The typical elements of an USM are 
 Slurry delivery and return system 
 Feed mechanism to provide a downward feed force on the tool during machining 
 The transducer, which generates the ultrasonic vibration 
 The horn or concentrator, which mechanically amplifies the vibration to the 
required amplitude of 15  50  accommodates the tool at its tip. 
 
 
2.4 Working of horn as mechanical amplifier of amplitude of vibration 
 
 
 
 
The ultrasonic vibrations are produced by the transducer. The transducer is driven 
by suitable signal generator followed by power amplifier. 
The transducer for USM works on the following principle 
 Piezoelectric effect 
 Magnetostrictive effect 
 Electrostrictive effect 
 
Non-Traditional  Machining   
 
Magnetostrictive transducers are most popular and robust amongst all. Figure shows a 
typical magnetostrictive transducer along with horn. The horn or concentrator is a wave 
guide, which amplifies and concentrates the vibration to the tool from the transducer. 
 
The horn or concentrator can be of different shape like 
 Tapered or conical 
 Exponential 
 Stepped 
 
 
Machining of tapered or stepped horn is much easier as compared to the exponential one. 
Figure shows different horns used in USM 
 
 
 
2.5 PROCESS VARIABLES: 
 Amplitude of vibration (a o)  15  50  
 Frequency of vibration (f)  19  25 kHz 
 Feed force (F)  related to tool dimensions 
 Feed pressure (p) 
 Abrasive size    
 
 
 
 
 
 
Non-Traditional  Machining   
  
 Abrasive material  Al2O3 
- SiC 
- B4C 
- Boronsilicarbide 
- Diamond 
 Flow strength of work material 
 Flow strength of the tool material 
 Contact area of the tool  A 
 Volume concentration of abrasive in water slurry  C 
 
2.6 Applications of USM 
 Used for machining hard and brittle metallic alloys, semiconductors, glass, 
ceramics, carbides etc. 
 Used for machining round, square, irregular shaped holes and surface impressions. 
 Machining, wire drawing, punching or small blanking dies. 
 
 
Figure: A non-round hole made by USM 
 
 
 
 
2.7 Advantage of USM 
USM process is a non-thermal, non-chemical, creates no changes in the microstructures, 
chemical or physical properties of the workpiece and offers virtually stress free machined 
surfaces. 
Non-Traditional  Machining   
  
The main advantages are; 
 Any materials can be machined regardless of their electrical conductivity 
 Especially suitable for machining of brittle materials 
 Machined parts by USM possess better surface finish and higher structural integrity. 
 USM does not produce thermal, electrical and chemical abnormal surface 
 
 
2.8 Disadvantages of USM 
 USM has higher power consumption and lower material-removal rates than traditional 
fabrication processes. 
 Tool wears fast in USM. 
 Machining area and depth is restraint in USM. 
 
FURTHER READING: 
1. Modern machining process, Pandey and Shah, Tata McGraw Hill 2000 
2. New Technology, Bhattacharya 2000 
3. Production Technology, HMT Tata McGraw Hill. 2001 
 
Self-Assessment Questions 
1. What is ultrasonic machining? 
2. What are the advantages of USM? 
3. What are the Disadvantages of USM? 
4. What are the applications of USM? 
5. What is ultrasonic transducer? 
6. What are the magnetostrivtive materials employed in USM? 
7. What is the purpose of concentrator used in USM? 
Non-Traditional  Machining   
 
ABRASIVE JET MACHINING (AJM) 
 
LESSON STRUCTURE: 
3.1 Introduction 
3.2 Working principle 
3.3 AJM Equipment 
3.4 Process Parameters and Machining Characteristics 
3.4 Applications 
3.5 Advantages of abrasive jet cutting 
3.6 Limitations of abrasive jet cutting 
3.7 Introduction to Water Jet Machining 
 
 
OBJECTIVES: 
 Describe the basic mechanism of material removal in AJM
 Identify major components of AJM equipment
 State the working principle of AJM
 Identify the process parameters of AJM
 Identify the machining characteristics of AJM
 Analyse the effect of process parameters on material removal rate (MRR)
 Draw variation in MRR with different process parameters
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Non-Traditional  Machining   
 
ABRASIVE JET MACHINING (AJM) 
 
3.1 Introduction 
 
Abrasive water jet cutting is an extended version of water jet cutting; in which the 
water jet contains abrasive particles such as silicon carbide or aluminium oxide in order 
to increase the material removal rate above that of water jet machining. Almost any type 
of material ranging from hard brittle materials such as ceramics, metals and glass to 
extremely soft materials such as foam and rubbers can be cut by abrasive water jet 
cutting. The narrow cutting stream and computer controlled movement enables this 
process to produce parts accurately and efficiently. This machining process is especially 
ideal for cutting materials that cannot be cut by laser or thermal cut. Metallic, non- 
metallic and advanced composite materials of various thicknesses can be cut by this 
process. This process is particularly suitable for heat sensitive materials that cannot be 
machined by processes that produce heat while machining. 
 
3.2 Working principle 
 
 
 
 
 
Non-Traditional Machining 
 
 
In Abrasive Jet Machining (AJM), abrasive particles are made to impinge on the 
work material at a high velocity. The jet of abrasive particles is carried by carrier gas or 
air. The high velocity stream of abrasive is generated by converting the pressure energy 
of the carrier gas or air to its kinetic energy and hence high velocity jet. The nozzle 
directs the abrasive jet in a controlled manner onto the work material, so that the distance 
between the nozzle and the work piece and the impingement angle can be set desirably. 
The high velocity abrasive particles remove the material by micro-cutting action as well 
as brittle fracture of the work material. 
 
3.3 AJM Equipment 
 
 
 
 
In AJM, air is compressed in an air compressor and compressed air at a pressure 
of around 5 bar is used as the carrier gas. Figure also shows the other major parts of the 
AJM system. Gases like CO 2, N2 can also be used as carrier gas which may directly be 
issued from a gas cylinder. Generally oxygen is not used as a carrier gas. The carrier gas 
 
Non-Traditional  Machining   
  
is first passed through a pressure regulator to obtain the desired working pressure. To 
remove any oil vapour or particulate contaminant the same is passed through a series of 
filters. Then the carrier gas enters a closed chamber known as the mixing chamber. The 
abrasive particles enter the chamber from a hopper through a metallic sieve. The sieve is 
constantly vibrated by an electromagnetic shaker. The mass flow rate of abrasive (15 
gm/min) entering the chamber depends on the amplitude of vibration of the sieve and its 
frequency. The abrasive particles are then carried by the carrier gas to the machining 
chamber via an electro-magnetic on-off valve. The machining enclosure is essential to 
contain the abrasive and machined particles in a safe and eco-friendly manner. The 
machining is carried out as high velocity (200 m/s) abrasive particles are issued from the 
nozzle onto a work piece traversing under the jet. 
3.4 Process Parameters and Machining Characteristics. 
 
The process parameters are listed below: 
 Abrasive 
 
Material  Al2O3 / SiC / glass 
beads Shape  irregular / spherical 
Size   
Mass flow rate  2 ~ 20 gm/min 
 Carrier gas 
 Composition  Air, CO 2, N2
 Density  Air ~ 1.3 kg/m3
 Velocity  500 ~ 700 m/s
 Pressure  2 ~ 10 bar
 Flow rate  5 ~ 30 lpm
 
 Abrasive Jet 
Velocity  100 ~ 300 m/s 
Mixing ratio  mass flow ratio of abrasive to gas 
Stand-off distance  0.5 ~ 5 mm 
Impingement Angle  600 ~ 900 
Non-Traditional  Machining   
  
 Nozzle 
Material  WC / sapphire 
Diameter  (Internal) 0.2 ~ 0.8 
mm Life  10 ~ 300 hours 
The important machining characteristics in AJM are 
3 
 The material removal rate (MRR) mm /min or gm/min 
 The machining accuracy 
 The life of the nozzle 
 
 
 
 
Effect of process parameters MRR 
Non-Traditional  Machining   
  
Parameters of Abrasive Jet Maching (AJM) are factors that influence its Metal 
Removal Rate (MRR). In a machining process, Metal Removal Rate (MRR) is the 
volume of metal removed from a given work piece in unit time. The following are some 
of the important process parameters of abrasive jet machining: 
1. Abrasive mass flow rate 
2. Nozzle tip distance 
3. Gas Pressure 
4. Velocity of abrasive particles 
5. Mixing ratio 
6. Abrasive grain size 
 
 
Abrasive mass flow rate: 
Mass flow rate of the abrasive particles is a major process parameter that 
influences the metal removal rate in abrasive jet machining. 
 
AJM, mass flow rate of the gas (or air) in abrasive jet is inversely proportional to 
the mass flow rate of the abrasive particles. 
 
ue to this fact, when continuously increasing the abrasive mass flow rate, Metal 
Removal Rate (MRR) first increases to an optimum value (because of increase in number 
of abrasive particles hitting the work piece) and then decreases. 
 
However, if the mixing ratio is kept constant, Metal Removal Rate (MRR) 
uniformly increases with increase in abrasive mass flow rate. 
 
Nozzle tip distance: 
Nozzle Tip Distance (NTD) is the gap provided between the nozzle tip and the 
work piece. 
Up to a certain limit, Metal Removal Rate (MRR) increases with increase in nozzle tip 
distance. After that limit, MRR remains constant to some extent and then decreases. 
Non-Traditional  Machining   
  
In addition to metal removal rate, nozzle tip distance influences the shape and diameter of 
cut. 
 
For optimal performance, a nozzle tip distance of 0.25 to 0.75 mm is provided. 
 
Gas pressure: 
ir or gas pressure has a direct impact on metal removal rate. 
In abrasive jet machining, metal removal rate is directly proportional to air or gas 
pressure. 
 
Velocity of abrasive particles: 
Whenever the velocity of abrasive particles is increased, the speed at which the 
abrasive particles hit the work piece is increased. Because of this reason, in abrasive jet 
machining, metal removal rate increases with increase in velocity of abrasive particles. 
 
Mixing ratio: 
Mixing ratio is a ratio that determines the quality of the air-abrasive mixture in 
Abrasive Jet Machining (AJM). 
 
It is the ratio between the mass flow rate of abrasive particles and the mass flow rate of 
air (or gas). 
 
When mixing ratio is increased continuously, metal removal rate first increases to some 
extent and then decreases. 
 
Abrasive grain size: 
Size of the abrasive particle determines the speed at which metal is removed. 
 
 
If smooth and fine surface finish is to be obtained, abrasive particle with small grain size 
is used. 
 
If metal has to be removed rapidly, abrasive particle with large grain size is used. 
Non-Traditional  Machining   
 
3.5 Applications 
Abrasive water jet cutting is highly used in aerospace, automotive and electronics 
industries. 
In aerospace industries, parts such as titanium bodies for military aircrafts, engine 
components (aluminium, titanium, heat resistant alloys), aluminium body parts 
and interior cabin parts are made using abrasive water jet cutting. 
In automotive industries, parts like interior trim (head liners, trunk liners, door 
panels) and fibre glass body components and bumpers are made by this process. 
Similarly, in electronics industries, circuit boards and cable stripping are made by 
abrasive water jet cutting. 
Figure: Steel gear and rack cut with an abrasive water jet 
 
 
3.6 Advantages of abrasive water jet cutting 
 In most of the cases, no secondary finishing required 
 No cutter induced distortion 
 Low cutting forces on workpieces 
 Limited tooling requirements 
 Little to no cutting burr 
 Typical finish 125-250 microns 
 Smaller kerf size reduces material wastages 
 
 
[Type text] [Type text] [Type text] 
 
Non-Traditional Machining   
 
 No heat affected zone 
 Localises structural changes 
 No cutter induced metal contamination 
 Eliminates thermal distortion 
 No slag or cutting dross 
 Precise, multi plane cutting of contours, shapes, and bevels of any angle. 
 
 
3.7 Limitations of abrasive water jet cutting 
 Cannot drill flat bottom 
 Cannot cut materials that degrades quickly with moisture 
 Surface finish degrades at higher cut speeds which are frequently used for rough 
cutting. 
 The major disadvantages of abrasive water jet cutting are high capital cost and 
high 
 noise levels during operation . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Non-Traditional Machining 
 
 
 
WATERJETMACHINING (WJM)
3.8 Introduction to Water Jet Machining  
brasive water jet cutting is an extended version of water jet cutting; in which the 
water jet contains abrasive particles such as silicon carbide or aluminium oxide in order 
to increase the material removal rate above that of water jet machining. Almost any type 
of material ranging from hard brittle materials such as ceramics, metals and glass to 
extremely soft materials such as foam and rubbers can be cut by abrasive water jet 
cutting. The narrow cutting stream and computer controlled movement enables this 
process to produce parts accurately and efficiently. This machining process is especially 
ideal for cutting materials that cannot be cut by laser or thermal cut. Metallic, non- 
metallic and advanced composite materials of various thicknesses can be cut by this 
process. This process is particularly suitable for heat sensitive materials that cannot be 
machined by processes that produce heat while machining. 
 
he schematic of abrasive water jet cutting is shown in Figure which is similar to 
water jet cutting apart from some more features underneath the jewel; namely abrasive, 
guard and mixing tube. In this process, high velocity water exiting the jewel creates a 
vacuum which sucks abrasive from the abrasive line, which mixes with the water in the 
mixing tube to form a high velocity beam of abrasives. 
 
Figure: Abrasive water jet machining 
 
Non-Traditional  Machining   
 
Applications 
 
Abrasive water jet cutting is highly used in aerospace, automotive and electronics 
industries. In aerospace industries, parts such as titanium bodies for military aircrafts, 
engine components (aluminium, titanium, heat resistant alloys), aluminium body parts 
and interior cabin parts are made using abrasive water jet cutting. 
 
In automotive industries, parts like interior trim (head liners, trunk liners, door 
panels) and fibre glass body components and bumpers are made by this process. 
Similarly, in electronics industries, circuit boards and cable stripping are made by 
abrasive water jet cutting. 
 
FURTHER READING: 
1. Modern machining process, Pandey and Shah, Tata McGraw Hill 2000 
2. New Technology, Bhattacharya 2000 
3. Production Technology, HMT Tata McGraw Hill. 2001 
 
Self-Assessment Questions 
1. Define AJM? 
2. What are the advantages of AJM process? 
3. What are the applications of AJM? 
4. Write the Disadvantages of AJM process? 
5. Give a summary of the abrasive of their application for different operation? 
6. What are the Process parameters affecting the MRR in AJM? 
7. What are the different types abrasives used in AJM? 
8. Reuse of abrasives is not recommended in AJM. Why? 
9. What are the properties of water jet machining about effect cutting action? 
10. What are the advantages of WJC over conventional cutting methods? 
11. What are the applications of WJM? 
12. What are the commonly used additives in WJM? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Non-Traditional  Machining   
 
ELECTROCHEMICAL MACHINING (ECM) 
 
 
LESSON STRUCTURE: 
 
4.1 Definition 
4.2 Effect of MRR in ECM 
4.3 Advantages of ECM 
4.4 Limitations of ECM 
 
 
OBJECTIVES 
 Identify electro-chemical machining (ECM) as a particular type of non-tradition 
Processes 
 Describe the basic working principle of ECM process 
 Describe material removal mechanism in ECM 
 Identify the process parameters in ECM 
 Identify different modules of ECM equipment 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Non-Traditional  Machining   
 
ELECTROCHEMICAL MACHINING (ECM) 
 
4.1 Introduction 
 
Electrochemical machining (ECM) is a metal-removal process based on the 
principle of reverse electroplating. In this process, particles travel from the anodic 
material (workpiece) toward the cathodic material (machining tool). A current of 
electrolyte fluid carries away the deplated material before it has a chance to reach the 
machining tool. The cavity produced is the female mating image of the tool shape. 
 
 
 
 
 
ECM process 
 
 
Similar to EDM, the workpiece hardness is not a factor, making ECM suitable for 
machining difficult-to machine materials. Difficult shapes can be made by this process 
on materials regardless of their hardness. A schematic representation of ECM process is 
shown in Figure 8. The ECM tool is positioned very close to the workpiece and a low 
 
 
/m 
cm /amp  Non-Traditional Machining  
 
 
voltage, high amperage DC current is passed between the workpiece and electrode. Some 
of the shapes made by ECM process is shown in Figure. 
 
4.2 Effect of MRR in ECM 
 
Material removal rate, MRR, in electrochemical machining: 
 
3MRR = C .I. h  (cm  in) 
3C: specific (material) removal rate (e.g., 
0.2052  -min for nickel);                                                                                
I: current (amp); 
h: current efficiency (90 100%). 
 
The rates at which metal can electrochemically remove are in proportion to the 
current passed through the electrolyte and the elapsed time for that operation. Many 
factors other than current influence the rate of machining. These involve electrolyte type, 
rate of electrolyte flow, and some other process conditions. 
 
 
 
 
 
Parts made by ECM 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Non-Traditional  Machining   
/amp/m  
4.2 Advantages of ECM 
 
 The components are not subject to either thermal or mechanical stress. 
 No tool wear during ECM process. 
 Fragile parts can be machined easily as there is no stress involved. 
 ECM deburring can debur difficult to access areas of parts. 
 High surface finish (up to 25 탆 in) can be achieved by ECM process. 
 Complex geometrical shapes in high-strength materials particularly in the 
aerospace industry for the mass production of turbine blades, jet-engine parts and 
nozzles can be machined repeatedly and accurately. 
 Deep holes can be made by this process. 
 
 
4.3 Limitations of ECM 
 
 ECM is not suitable to produce sharp square corners or flat bottoms because of 
the tendency for the electrolyte to erode away sharp profiles. 
 ECM can be applied to most metals but, due to the high equipment costs, is 
usually used primarily for highly specialised applications. 
 
 
Material removal rate, MRR, in electrochemical machining: 
 
3MRR = C .I. h  (cm  in) 
C: specific (material) removal rate (e.g., 0.2052 cm3 -min for nickel); 
I: current (amp); 
h: current efficiency (90 100%). 
 
The rates at which metal can electrochemically remove are in proportion to the current 
passed through the electrolyte and the elapsed time for that operation. Many factors other 
than current influence the rate of machining. These involve electrolyte type, rate of 
electrolyte flow, and some other process conditions. 
Non-Traditional  Machining   
FURTHER READING: 
1. Modern machining process, Pandey and Shah, Tata McGraw Hill 2000 
2. New Technology, Bhattacharya 2000 
3. Production Technology, HMT Tata McGraw Hill. 2001 
 
Self-Assessment Questions 
1. Define ECM? 
2. What are the factors that influence oxidation in ECM? 
3. What are the materials used to make the tool electrode? 
4. What are the main functions of electrolysis in the ECM? 
5. What are the properties are expected from the electrolysis used in the ECM? 
6. What are the parameters that affect the MRR? 
7. What are the advantages of ECM? 
8. What are the limitations of ECM? 
9. What are the applications of ECM? 
10. Which material is used to make the grinding wheel? 
11. What are the advantages of ECG? 
12. What are the disadvantages of ECG? 
13. What are the limitations of ECG? 
14. What is the application of ECG? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHEMICAL MACHINING (CHM) 
LESSON STRUCTURE: 
5.1 Introduction 
5.2 CHEMICAL MILLING 
5.3 Steps in chemical milling 
5.4 Applications 
 
 
OBJECTIVES 
 Describe the basic working principle of CHM process 
 Describe material removal mechanism in CHM 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Non-Traditional  Machining   
  
CHEMICAL MACHINING (CHM) 
 
5.1 Introduction 
 
Chemical machining (CM) is the controlled dissolution of workpiece material 
(etching) by means of a strong chemical reagent (etchant). In CM material is removed 
from selected areas of workpiece by immersing it in a chemical reagents or etchants; such 
as acids and alkaline solutions. Material is removed by microscopic electrochemical cell 
action, as occurs in corrosion or chemical dissolution of a metal. This controlled chemical 
dissolution will simultaneously etch all exposed surfaces even though the penetration 
rates of the material removal may be only 0.0025 0.1 mm/min. The basic process takes 
many forms: chemical milling of pockets, contours, overall metal removal, chemical 
blanking for etching through thin sheets; photochemical machining (pcm) for etching by 
using of photosensitive resists in microelectronics; chemical or electrochemical polishing 
where weak chemical reagents are used (sometimes with remote electric assist) for 
polishing or deburring and chemical jet machining where a single chemically active jet is 
used. A schematic of chemical machining process is shown in Figure. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) Schematic of chemical machining process (b) Stages in producing a profiled cavity 
by chemical machining (Kalpakjain & Schmid) 
Non-Traditional  Machining   
  
5.2 CHEMICAL MILLING 
 
In chemical milling, shallow cavities are produced on plates, sheets, forgings and 
extrusions. The two key materials used in chemical milling process are etchant and 
maskant. Etchants are acid or alkaline solutions maintained within controlled ranges of 
chemical composition and temperature. Maskants are specially designed elastomeric 
products that are hand strippable and chemically resistant to the harsh etchants. 
 
 
5.3 Steps in chemical milling 
 
 Residual stress relieving: If the part to be machined has residual stresses from the 
previous processing, these stresses first should be relieved in order to prevent 
warping after chemical milling. 
 Preparing: The surfaces are degreased and cleaned thoroughly to ensure both 
good adhesion of the masking material and the uniform material removal. 
 Masking: Masking material is applied (coating or protecting areas not to be 
etched). 
 Etching: The exposed surfaces are machined chemically with etchants. 
 Demasking: After machining, the parts should be washed thoroughly to prevent 
further reactions with or exposure to any etchant residues. Then the rest of the 
masking material is removed and the part is cleaned and inspected. 
 
5.4 Applications: 
 
Chemical milling is used in the aerospace industry to remove shallow layers of material 
from large aircraft components missile skin panels (Figure ), extruded parts for airframes. 
Non-Traditional  Machining   
  
Figure : Missile skin-panel section contoured by chemical milling to improve the 
stiffness- to- weight ratio of the part (Kalpakjain & Schmid) 
 
FURTHER READING: 
1. Modern machining process, Pandey and Shah, Tata McGraw Hill 2000 
2. New Technology, Bhattacharya 2000 
3. Production Technology, HMT Tata McGraw Hill. 2001 
Non-Traditional  Machining   
 
CHEMICAL MACHINING (CHM) 
LESSON STRUCTURE: 
5.1 Introduction 
5.2 CHEMICAL MILLING 
5.3 Steps in chemical milling 
5.4 Applications 
 
 
OBJECTIVES 
 Describe the basic working principle of CHM process 
 Describe material removal mechanism in CHM 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Non-Traditional  Machining   
  
CHEMICAL MACHINING (CHM) 
 
5.1 Introduction 
 
Chemical machining (CM) is the controlled dissolution of workpiece material 
(etching) by means of a strong chemical reagent (etchant). In CM material is removed 
from selected areas of workpiece by immersing it in a chemical reagents or etchants; such 
as acids and alkaline solutions. Material is removed by microscopic electrochemical cell 
action, as occurs in corrosion or chemical dissolution of a metal. This controlled chemical 
dissolution will simultaneously etch all exposed surfaces even though the penetration 
rates of the material removal may be only 0.0025 0.1 mm/min. The basic process takes 
many forms: chemical milling of pockets, contours, overall metal removal, chemical 
blanking for etching through thin sheets; photochemical machining (pcm) for etching by 
using of photosensitive resists in microelectronics; chemical or electrochemical polishing 
where weak chemical reagents are used (sometimes with remote electric assist) for 
polishing or deburring and chemical jet machining where a single chemically active jet is 
used. A schematic of chemical machining process is shown in Figure. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) Schematic of chemical machining process (b) Stages in producing a profiled cavity 
by chemical machining (Kalpakjain & Schmid) 
Non-Traditional  Machining   
  
5.2 CHEMICAL MILLING 
 
In chemical milling, shallow cavities are produced on plates, sheets, forgings and 
extrusions. The two key materials used in chemical milling process are etchant and 
maskant. Etchants are acid or alkaline solutions maintained within controlled ranges of 
chemical composition and temperature. Maskants are specially designed elastomeric 
products that are hand strippable and chemically resistant to the harsh etchants. 
 
 
5.3 Steps in chemical milling 
 
 Residual stress relieving: If the part to be machined has residual stresses from the 
previous processing, these stresses first should be relieved in order to prevent 
warping after chemical milling. 
 Preparing: The surfaces are degreased and cleaned thoroughly to ensure both 
good adhesion of the masking material and the uniform material removal. 
 Masking: Masking material is applied (coating or protecting areas not to be 
etched). 
 Etching: The exposed surfaces are machined chemically with etchants. 
 Demasking: After machining, the parts should be washed thoroughly to prevent 
further reactions with or exposure to any etchant residues. Then the rest of the 
masking material is removed and the part is cleaned and inspected. 
 
5.4 Applications: 
 
Chemical milling is used in the aerospace industry to remove shallow layers of material 
from large aircraft components missile skin panels (Figure ), extruded parts for airframes. 
Non-Traditional  Machining   
  
Figure : Missile skin-panel section contoured by chemical milling to improve the 
stiffness- to- weight ratio of the part (Kalpakjain & Schmid) 
 
FURTHER READING: 
1. Modern machining process, Pandey and Shah, Tata McGraw Hill 2000 
2. New Technology, Bhattacharya 2000 
3. Production Technology, HMT Tata McGraw Hill. 2001 
Non-Traditional  Machining   
 
ELECTRICAL DISCHARGE MACHINING (EDM) 
 
LESSON STRUCTURE: 
6.1 Introduction 
6.2 Working principle of EDM 
6.3 Dielectric fluids 
6.4 Wire EDM 
6.5 Application of EDM 
6.6 Advantages of EDM 
6.7 Limitations of EDM 
 
 
OBJECTIVES 
 Identify electro-discharge machining (EDM) as a particular type of non-tradition 
Processes 
 Describe the basic working principle of EDM process 
 Describe material removal mechanism in EDM 
 Identify the process parameters in EDM 
 Describe the characteristics of EDM 
 Identify the purpose of dielectric fluid in EDM 
 Identify the machining characteristics in EDM 
 Analyse the effect of process variables on surface roughness 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Non-Traditional  Machining   
  
ELECTRICAL DISCHARGE MACHINING (EDM) 
 
6.1 Introduction 
 
Electrical discharge machining (EDM) is one of the most widely used non- 
traditional machining processes. The main attraction of EDM over traditional machining 
processes such as metal cutting using different tools and grinding is that this technique 
utilises thermoelectric process to erode undesired materials from the workpiece by a 
series of discrete electrical sparks between the workpiece and the electrode. A picture of 
EDM machine in operation is shown in Figure. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure : Electrical discharge machine 
 
 
The traditional machining processes rely on harder tool or abrasive material to 
remove the softer material whereas non-traditional machining processes such as EDM 
uses electrical spark or thermal energy to erode unwanted material in order to create 
desired shape. So, the hardness of the material is no longer a dominating factor for EDM 
process. A schematic of an EDM process is shown in Figure 2, where the tool and the 
workpiece are immersed in a dielectric fluid. 
Non-Traditional  Machining   
 (cm /min)  
6.2 Working principle of EDM 
 
As shown in Figure 1, at the beginning of EDM operation, a high voltage is 
applied across the narrow gap between the electrode and the workpiece. This high voltage 
induces an electric field in the insulating dielectric that is present in narrow gap between 
electrode and workpiece. This cause conducting particles suspended in the dielectric to 
concentrate at the points of strongest electrical field. When the potential difference 
between the electrode and the workpiece is sufficiently high, the dielectric breaks down 
and a transient spark discharges through the dielectric fluid, removing small amount of 
material from the workpiece surface. The volume of the material removed per spark 
-6         -6        3 
discharge is typically in the range of 10 to 10 mm . 
 
The material removal rate, MRR, in EDM is calculated by the following foumula: 
MRR = 40 I / T m 1.23 3 
Where, I is the current amp, 
 
0 
Tm is the melting temperature of workpiece in C 
 
 
 
Figure: Schematic of EDM process 
Non-Traditional  Machining   
 
 
 
EDM removes material by discharging an electrical current, normally stored in a 
capacitor bank, across a small gap between the tool (cathode) and the workpiece (anode) 
typically in the order of 50 volts/10amps. 
 
6.3 Dielectric fluids 
 
Dielectric fluids used in EDM process are hydrocarbon oils, kerosene and 
deionised water. The functions of the dielectric fluid are to: 
 
 Act as an insulator between the tool and the workpiece. 
 Act as coolant. 
 Act as a flushing medium for the removal of the chips. 
 
 
The electrodes for EDM process usually are made of graphite, brass, copper and copper- 
tungsten alloys. 
 
Design considerations for EDM process are as follows: 
 
 Deep slots and narrow openings should be avoided. 
 The surface smoothness value should not be specified too fine. 
 Rough cut should be done by other machining process. Only finishing operation 
should be done in this process as MRR for this process is low. 
 
 
6.4 Wire EDM 
 
EDM, primarily, exists commercially in the form of die-sinking machines and 
wire-cutting machines (Wire EDM). The concept of wire EDM is shown in Figure 4. In 
this process, a slowly moving wire travels along a prescribed path and removes material 
from the workpiece. Wire EDM uses electro-thermal mechanisms to cut electrically 
conductive materials. The material is removed by a series of discrete discharges between 
the wire electrode and the workpiece in the presence of dieelectirc fluid, which creates a 
path for each discharge as the fluid becomes ionized in the gap. The area where discharge 
takes 
Non-Traditional  Machining   
 
place is heated to extremely high temperature, so that the surface is melted and removed. 
The removed particles are flushed away by the flowing dielectric fluids. 
 
The wire EDM process can cut intricate components for the electric and aerospace 
industries. This non-traditional machining process is widely used to pattern tool steel for 
die manufacturing. 
 
 
Wire erosion of an extrusion die 
 
The wires for wire EDM is made of brass, copper, tungsten, molybdenum. Zinc or 
brass coated wires are also used extensively in this process. The wire used in this process 
should posses high tensile strength and good electrical conductivity. Wire EDM can also 
employ to cut cylindrical objects with high precision. The sparked eroded extrusion dies 
are presented in Figure. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Non-Traditional  Machining   
  
 
Sparked eroded extrusion dies 
 
This process is usually used in conjunction with CNC and will only work when a 
part is to be cut completely through. The melting temperature of the parts to be machined 
is an important parameter for this process rather than strength or hardness. The surface 
quality and MRR of the machined surface by wire EDM will depend on different 
machining parameters such as applied peak current, and wire materials. 
 
6.5 Application of EDM 
 
The EDM process has the ability to machine hard, difficult-to-machine materials. 
Parts with complex, precise and irregular shapes for forging, press tools, extrusion dies, 
difficult internal shapes for aerospace and medical applications can be made by EDM 
process. Some of the shapes made by EDM process are shown in Figure. 
. 
Non-Traditional  Machining   
  
 
Figure: Difficult internal parts made by EDM process 
 
6.6 Advantages of EDM 
 
The main advantages of DM are: 
 
 By this process, materials of any hardness can be machined; 
 No burrs are left in machined surface; 
 One of the main advantages of this process is that thin and fragile/brittle 
components can be machined without distortion; 
 Complex internal shapes can be machined 
 
 
6.7 Limitations of EDM 
 
The main limitations of this process are: 
 
 This process can only be employed in electrically conductive materials; 
 Material removal rate is low and the process overall is slow compared to 
conventional machining processes; 
 Unwanted erosion and over cutting of material can occur; 
Non-Traditional  Machining   
 
FURTHER READING: 
1. Modern machining process, Pandey and Shah, Tata McGraw Hill 2000 
2. New Technology, Bhattacharya 2000 
3. Production Technology, HMT Tata McGraw Hill. 2001 
 
Self-Assessment Questions 
1. Define electrical discharge machining? 
2. What are functions of dielectric fluid used in EDM? 
3. Basic requirement of dielectric fluid used in EDM? 
4. What the dielectric fluids commonly used in EDM? 
5. Name some of the tool material used in EDM? 
6. What is the process parameter efficiency the MRR? 
7. Explain electrode wear? 
8. What are types of power supply circuits used in EDM? 
9. What are the design factors to be considered while selecting the machine tool? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Non-Traditional  Machining   
UNIT -7 
LASER BEAM MACHINING (LBM) 
 
LESSON STRUCTURE: 
 
7.1 Introduction 
7.2 Laser beam cutting (drilling) 
7.3 Laser beam cutting (milling) 
7.4 Advantage of laser cutting 
7.5 Limitations of laser cutting 
 
 
OBJECTIVES: 
 Describe the basic mechanism of material removal in LBM 
 Identify major components of LBM equipment 
 State the working principle of LBM equipment 
 Identify the machining characteristics of LBM 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Non-Traditional  Machining   
  
LASER BEAM MACHINING (LBM) 
 
7.1 Introduction 
 
Laser-beam machining is a thermal material-removal process that utilizes a high- 
energy, coherent light beam to melt and vaporize particles on the surface of metallic and 
non-metallic workpieces. Lasers can be used to cut, drill, weld and mark. LBM is 
particularly suitable for making accurately placed holes. A schematic of laser beam 
machining is shown in Figure. 
Different types of lasers are available for manufacturing operations which are as follows: 
 
 CO2 (pulsed or continuous wave): It is a gas laser that emits light in the infrared 
region. It can provide up to 25 kW in continuous-wave mode. 
 Nd:YAG: Neodymium-doped Yttrium-Aluminum-Garnet (Y 3Al5O12) laser is a 
solid-state laser which can deliver light through a fibre-optic cable. It can provide 
up to 50 kW power in pulsed mode and 1 kW in continuous-wave mode. 
 
 
 
 
Figure: Laser beam machining schematic 
Non-Traditional  Machining   
  
7.2 Laser beam cutting (drilling) 
 
 In drilling, energy transferred (e.g., via a Nd:YAG laser) into the workpiece melts 
the material at the point of contact, which subsequently changes into a plasma and 
leaves the region. 
 A gas jet (typically, oxygen) can further facilitate this phase transformation and 
departure of material removed. 
 Laser drilling should be targeted for hard materials and hole geometries that are 
difficult to achieve with other methods. 
 
 
A typical SEM micrograph hole drilled by laser beam machining process 
employed in making a hole is shown in Figure 
 
. 
Figure: SEM micrograph hole drilled in 250 micro meter thick Silicon Nitride with 3rd 
harmonic Nd: YAG laser 
 
7.3 Laser beam cutting (milling) 
 
 A laser spot reflected onto the surface of a workpiece travels along a prescribed 
trajectory and cuts into the material. 
 Continuous-wave mode (CO 2) gas lasers are very suitable for laser cutting 
providing high-average power, yielding high material-removal rates, and 
smooth cutting surfaces. 
Non-Traditional  Machining   
 
7.4 Advantage of laser cutting 
 
 No limit to cutting path as the laser point can move any path. 
 The process is stress less allowing very fragile materials to be laser cut without 
any support. 
 Very hard and abrasive material can be cut. 
 Sticky materials are also can be cut by this process. 
 It is a cost effective and flexible process. 
 High accuracy parts can be machined. 
 No cutting lubricants required 
 No tool wear 
 Narrow heat effected zone 
 
7.5 Limitations of laser cutting 
 
 Uneconomic on high volumes compared to stamping 
 Limitations on thickness due to taper 
 High capital cost 
 High maintenance cost 
 Assist or cover gas required 
 
 
FURTHER READING: 
1. Modern machining process, Pandey and Shah, Tata McGraw Hill 2000 
2. New Technology, Bhattacharya 2000 
3. Production Technology, HMT Tata McGraw Hill. 2001 
 
Self-Assessment Questions 
1. What is Laser? 
2. What are the characteristics of Laser beam? 
3. What are the gases commonly used in LASER? 
4. What are the characteristics of Laser used in Laser machining? 
 
